<h2>I</h2>
<p class="poetry">I thought once how Theocritus had sung<br/>
Of the sweet years, the dear and wished-for years,<br/>
Who each one in a gracious hand appears<br/>
To bear a gift for mortals, old or young:<br/>
And, as I mused it in his antique tongue,<br/>
I saw, in gradual vision through my tears,<br/>
The sweet, sad years, the melancholy years,<br/>
Those of my own life, who by turns had flung<br/>
A shadow across me.  Straightway I was ’ware,<br/>
So weeping, how a mystic Shape did move<br/>
Behind me, and drew me backward by the hair;<br/>
And a voice said in mastery, while I strove,—<br/>
“Guess now who holds
thee!”—“Death,” I said, But, there,<br/>
The silver answer rang, “Not Death, but Love.”</p>
<h2>II</h2>
<p class="poetry">But only three in all God’s universe<br/>
Have heard this word thou hast said,—Himself, beside<br/>
Thee speaking, and me listening! and replied<br/>
One of us . . . that was God, . . . and laid the curse<br/>
So darkly on my eyelids, as to amerce<br/>
My sight from seeing thee,—that if I had died,<br/>
The death-weights, placed there, would have signified<br/>
Less absolute exclusion.  “Nay” is worse<br/>
From God than from all others, O my friend!<br/>
Men could not part us with their worldly jars,<br/>
Nor the seas change us, nor the tempests bend;<br/>
Our hands would touch for all the mountain-bars:<br/>
And, heaven being rolled between us at the end,<br/>
We should but vow the faster for the stars.</p>
<h2>III</h2>
<p class="poetry">Unlike are we, unlike, O princely Heart!<br/>
Unlike our uses and our destinies.<br/>
Our ministering two angels look surprise<br/>
On one another, as they strike athwart<br/>
Their wings in passing.  Thou, bethink thee, art<br/>
A guest for queens to social pageantries,<br/>
With gages from a hundred brighter eyes<br/>
Than tears even can make mine, to play thy part<br/>
Of chief musician.  What hast thou to do<br/>
With looking from the lattice-lights at me,<br/>
A poor, tired, wandering singer, singing through<br/>
The dark, and leaning up a cypress tree?<br/>
The chrism is on thine head,—on mine, the dew,—<br/>
And Death must dig the level where these agree.</p>
<h2>IV</h2>
<p class="poetry">Thou hast thy calling to some palace-floor,<br/>
Most gracious singer of high poems! where<br/>
The dancers will break footing, from the care<br/>
Of watching up thy pregnant lips for more.<br/>
And dost thou lift this house’s latch too poor<br/>
For hand of thine? and canst thou think and bear<br/>
To let thy music drop here unaware<br/>
In folds of golden fulness at my door?<br/>
Look up and see the casement broken in,<br/>
The bats and owlets builders in the roof!<br/>
My cricket chirps against thy mandolin.<br/>
Hush, call no echo up in further proof<br/>
Of desolation! there’s a voice within<br/>
That weeps . . . as thou must sing . . . alone, aloof.</p>
<h2>V</h2>
<p class="poetry">I lift my heavy heart up solemnly,<br/>
As once Electra her sepulchral urn,<br/>
And, looking in thine eyes, I over-turn<br/>
The ashes at thy feet.  Behold and see<br/>
What a great heap of grief lay hid in me,<br/>
And how the red wild sparkles dimly burn<br/>
Through the ashen greyness.  If thy foot in scorn<br/>
Could tread them out to darkness utterly,<br/>
It might be well perhaps.  But if instead<br/>
Thou wait beside me for the wind to blow<br/>
The grey dust up, . . . those laurels on thine head,<br/>
O my Belovëd, will not shield thee so,<br/>
That none of all the fires shall scorch and shred<br/>
The hair beneath.  Stand further off then! go!</p>
<h2>VI</h2>
<p class="poetry">Go from me.  Yet I feel that I shall
stand<br/>
Henceforward in thy shadow.  Nevermore<br/>
Alone upon the threshold of my door<br/>
Of individual life, I shall command<br/>
The uses of my soul, nor lift my hand<br/>
Serenely in the sunshine as before,<br/>
Without the sense of that which I forbore—<br/>
Thy touch upon the palm.  The widest land<br/>
Doom takes to part us, leaves thy heart in mine<br/>
With pulses that beat double.  What I do<br/>
And what I dream include thee, as the wine<br/>
Must taste of its own grapes.  And when I sue<br/>
God for myself, He hears that name of thine,<br/>
And sees within my eyes the tears of two.</p>
<h2>VII</h2>
<p class="poetry">The face of all the world is changed, I
think,<br/>
Since first I heard the footsteps of thy soul<br/>
Move still, oh, still, beside me, as they stole<br/>
Betwixt me and the dreadful outer brink<br/>
Of obvious death, where I, who thought to sink,<br/>
Was caught up into love, and taught the whole<br/>
Of life in a new rhythm.  The cup of dole<br/>
God gave for baptism, I am fain to drink,<br/>
And praise its sweetness, Sweet, with thee anear.<br/>
The names of country, heaven, are changed away<br/>
For where thou art or shalt be, there or here;<br/>
And this . . . this lute and song . . . loved yesterday,<br/>
(The singing angels know) are only dear<br/>
Because thy name moves right in what they say.</p>
<h2>VIII</h2>
<p class="poetry">What can I give thee back, O liberal<br/>
And princely giver, who hast brought the gold<br/>
And purple of thine heart, unstained, untold,<br/>
And laid them on the outside of the wall<br/>
For such as I to take or leave withal,<br/>
In unexpected largesse? am I cold,<br/>
Ungrateful, that for these most manifold<br/>
High gifts, I render nothing back at all?<br/>
Not so; not cold,—but very poor instead.<br/>
Ask God who knows.  For frequent tears have run<br/>
The colours from my life, and left so dead<br/>
And pale a stuff, it were not fitly done<br/>
To give the same as pillow to thy head.<br/>
Go farther! let it serve to trample on.</p>
<h2>IX</h2>
<p class="poetry">Can it be right to give what I can give?<br/>
To let thee sit beneath the fall of tears<br/>
As salt as mine, and hear the sighing years<br/>
Re-sighing on my lips renunciative<br/>
Through those infrequent smiles which fail to live<br/>
For all thy adjurations?  O my fears,<br/>
That this can scarce be right!  We are not peers<br/>
So to be lovers; and I own, and grieve,<br/>
That givers of such gifts as mine are, must<br/>
Be counted with the ungenerous.  Out, alas!<br/>
I will not soil thy purple with my dust,<br/>
Nor breathe my poison on thy Venice-glass,<br/>
Nor give thee any love—which were unjust.<br/>
Beloved, I only love thee! let it pass.</p>
<h2>X</h2>
<p class="poetry">Yet, love, mere love, is beautiful indeed<br/>
And worthy of acceptation.  Fire is bright,<br/>
Let temple burn, or flax; an equal light<br/>
Leaps in the flame from cedar-plank or weed:<br/>
And love is fire.  And when I say at need<br/>
I love thee . . . mark! . . . I love thee—in thy sight<br/>
I stand transfigured, glorified aright,<br/>
With conscience of the new rays that proceed<br/>
Out of my face toward thine.  There’s nothing low<br/>
In love, when love the lowest: meanest creatures<br/>
Who love God, God accepts while loving so.<br/>
And what I feel, across the inferior features<br/>
Of what I am, doth flash itself, and show<br/>
How that great work of Love enhances Nature’s.</p>
<h2>XI</h2>
<p class="poetry">And therefore if to love can be desert,<br/>
I am not all unworthy.  Cheeks as pale<br/>
As these you see, and trembling knees that fail<br/>
To bear the burden of a heavy heart,—<br/>
This weary minstrel-life that once was girt<br/>
To climb Aornus, and can scarce avail<br/>
To pipe now ’gainst the valley nightingale<br/>
A melancholy music,—why advert<br/>
To these things?  O Belovëd, it is plain<br/>
I am not of thy worth nor for thy place!<br/>
And yet, because I love thee, I obtain<br/>
From that same love this vindicating grace<br/>
To live on still in love, and yet in vain,—<br/>
To bless thee, yet renounce thee to thy face.</p>
<h2>XII</h2>
<p class="poetry">Indeed this very love which is my boast,<br/>
And which, when rising up from breast to brow,<br/>
Doth crown me with a ruby large enow<br/>
To draw men’s eyes and prove the inner cost,—<br/>
This love even, all my worth, to the uttermost,<br/>
I should not love withal, unless that thou<br/>
Hadst set me an example, shown me how,<br/>
When first thine earnest eyes with mine were crossed,<br/>
And love called love.  And thus, I cannot speak<br/>
Of love even, as a good thing of my own:<br/>
Thy soul hath snatched up mine all faint and weak,<br/>
And placed it by thee on a golden throne,—<br/>
And that I love (O soul, we must be meek!)<br/>
Is by thee only, whom I love alone.</p>
<h2>XIII</h2>
<p class="poetry">And wilt thou have me fashion into speech<br/>
The love I bear thee, finding words enough,<br/>
And hold the torch out, while the winds are rough,<br/>
Between our faces, to cast light on each?—<br/>
I drop it at thy feet.  I cannot teach<br/>
My hand to hold my spirits so far off<br/>
From myself—me—that I should bring thee proof<br/>
In words, of love hid in me out of reach.<br/>
Nay, let the silence of my womanhood<br/>
Commend my woman-love to thy belief,—<br/>
Seeing that I stand unwon, however wooed,<br/>
And rend the garment of my life, in brief,<br/>
By a most dauntless, voiceless fortitude,<br/>
Lest one touch of this heart convey its grief.</p>
<h2>XIV</h2>
<p class="poetry">If thou must love me, let it be for nought<br/>
Except for love’s sake only.  Do not say<br/>
“I love her for her smile—her look—her way<br/>
Of speaking gently,—for a trick of thought<br/>
That falls in well with mine, and certes brought<br/>
A sense of pleasant ease on such a day”—<br/>
For these things in themselves, Belovëd, may<br/>
Be changed, or change for thee,—and love, so wrought,<br/>
May be unwrought so.  Neither love me for<br/>
Thine own dear pity’s wiping my cheeks dry,—<br/>
A creature might forget to weep, who bore<br/>
Thy comfort long, and lose thy love thereby!<br/>
But love me for love’s sake, that evermore<br/>
Thou may’st love on, through love’s eternity.</p>
<h2>XV</h2>
<p class="poetry">Accuse me not, beseech thee, that I wear<br/>
Too calm and sad a face in front of thine;<br/>
For we two look two ways, and cannot shine<br/>
With the same sunlight on our brow and hair.<br/>
On me thou lookest with no doubting care,<br/>
As on a bee shut in a crystalline;<br/>
Since sorrow hath shut me safe in love’s divine,<br/>
And to spread wing and fly in the outer air<br/>
Were most impossible failure, if I strove<br/>
To fail so.  But I look on thee—on thee—<br/>
Beholding, besides love, the end of love,<br/>
Hearing oblivion beyond memory;<br/>
As one who sits and gazes from above,<br/>
Over the rivers to the bitter sea.</p>
<h2>XVI</h2>
<p class="poetry">And yet, because thou overcomest so,<br/>
Because thou art more noble and like a king,<br/>
Thou canst prevail against my fears and fling<br/>
Thy purple round me, till my heart shall grow<br/>
Too close against thine heart henceforth to know<br/>
How it shook when alone.  Why, conquering<br/>
May prove as lordly and complete a thing<br/>
In lifting upward, as in crushing low!<br/>
And as a vanquished soldier yields his sword<br/>
To one who lifts him from the bloody earth,<br/>
Even so, Belovëd, I at last record,<br/>
Here ends my strife.  If thou invite me forth,<br/>
I rise above abasement at the word.<br/>
Make thy love larger to enlarge my worth!</p>
<h2>XVII</h2>
<p class="poetry">My poet, thou canst touch on all the notes<br/>
God set between His After and Before,<br/>
And strike up and strike off the general roar<br/>
Of the rushing worlds a melody that floats<br/>
In a serene air purely.  Antidotes<br/>
Of medicated music, answering for<br/>
Mankind’s forlornest uses, thou canst pour<br/>
From thence into their ears.  God’s will devotes<br/>
Thine to such ends, and mine to wait on thine.<br/>
How, Dearest, wilt thou have me for most use?<br/>
A hope, to sing by gladly? or a fine<br/>
Sad memory, with thy songs to interfuse?<br/>
A shade, in which to sing—of palm or pine?<br/>
A grave, on which to rest from singing?  Choose.</p>
<h2>XVIII</h2>
<p class="poetry">I never gave a lock of hair away<br/>
To a man, Dearest, except this to thee,<br/>
Which now upon my fingers thoughtfully<br/>
I ring out to the full brown length and say<br/>
“Take it.”  My day of youth went yesterday;<br/>
My hair no longer bounds to my foot’s glee,<br/>
Nor plant I it from rose- or myrtle-tree,<br/>
As girls do, any more: it only may<br/>
Now shade on two pale cheeks the mark of tears,<br/>
Taught drooping from the head that hangs aside<br/>
Through sorrow’s trick.  I thought the
funeral-shears<br/>
Would take this first, but Love is justified,—<br/>
Take it thou,—finding pure, from all those years,<br/>
The kiss my mother left here when she died.</p>
<h2>XIX</h2>
<p class="poetry">The soul’s Rialto hath its
merchandize;<br/>
I barter curl for curl upon that mart,<br/>
And from my poet’s forehead to my heart<br/>
Receive this lock which outweighs argosies,—<br/>
As purply black, as erst to Pindar’s eyes<br/>
The dim purpureal tresses gloomed athwart<br/>
The nine white Muse-brows.  For this counterpart, . . .<br/>
The bay crown’s shade, Belovëd, I surmise,<br/>
Still lingers on thy curl, it is so black!<br/>
Thus, with a fillet of smooth-kissing breath,<br/>
I tie the shadows safe from gliding back,<br/>
And lay the gift where nothing hindereth;<br/>
Here on my heart, as on thy brow, to lack<br/>
No natural heat till mine grows cold in death.</p>
<h2>XX</h2>
<p class="poetry">Belovëd, my Belovëd, when I think<br/>
That thou wast in the world a year ago,<br/>
What time I sat alone here in the snow<br/>
And saw no footprint, heard the silence sink<br/>
No moment at thy voice, but, link by link,<br/>
Went counting all my chains as if that so<br/>
They never could fall off at any blow<br/>
Struck by thy possible hand,—why, thus I drink<br/>
Of life’s great cup of wonder!  Wonderful,<br/>
Never to feel thee thrill the day or night<br/>
With personal act or speech,—nor ever cull<br/>
Some prescience of thee with the blossoms white<br/>
Thou sawest growing!  Atheists are as dull,<br/>
Who cannot guess God’s presence out of sight.</p>
<h2>XXI</h2>
<p class="poetry">Say over again, and yet once over again,<br/>
That thou dost love me.  Though the word repeated<br/>
Should seem a “cuckoo-song,” as thou dost treat
it,<br/>
Remember, never to the hill or plain,<br/>
Valley and wood, without her cuckoo-strain<br/>
Comes the fresh Spring in all her green completed.<br/>
Belovëd, I, amid the darkness greeted<br/>
By a doubtful spirit-voice, in that doubt’s pain<br/>
Cry, “Speak once more—thou lovest!”  Who
can fear<br/>
Too many stars, though each in heaven shall roll,<br/>
Too many flowers, though each shall crown the year?<br/>
Say thou dost love me, love me, love me—toll<br/>
The silver iterance!—only minding, Dear,<br/>
To love me also in silence with thy soul.</p>
<h2>XXII</h2>
<p class="poetry">When our two souls stand up erect and
strong,<br/>
Face to face, silent, drawing nigh and nigher,<br/>
Until the lengthening wings break into fire<br/>
At either curvëd point,—what bitter wrong<br/>
Can the earth do to us, that we should not long<br/>
Be here contented?  Think!  In mounting higher,<br/>
The angels would press on us and aspire<br/>
To drop some golden orb of perfect song<br/>
Into our deep, dear silence.  Let us stay<br/>
Rather on earth, Belovëd,—where the unfit<br/>
Contrarious moods of men recoil away<br/>
And isolate pure spirits, and permit<br/>
A place to stand and love in for a day,<br/>
With darkness and the death-hour rounding it.</p>
<h2>XXIII</h2>
<p class="poetry">Is it indeed so?  If I lay here dead,<br/>
Wouldst thou miss any life in losing mine?<br/>
And would the sun for thee more coldly shine<br/>
Because of grave-damps falling round my head?<br/>
I marvelled, my Belovëd, when I read<br/>
Thy thought so in the letter.  I am thine—<br/>
But . . . so much to thee?  Can I pour thy wine<br/>
While my hands tremble?  Then my soul, instead<br/>
Of dreams of death, resumes life’s lower range.<br/>
Then, love me, Love! look on me—breathe on me!<br/>
As brighter ladies do not count it strange,<br/>
For love, to give up acres and degree,<br/>
I yield the grave for thy sake, and exchange<br/>
My near sweet view of heaven, for earth with thee!</p>
<h2>XXIV</h2>
<p class="poetry">Let the world’s sharpness like a clasping
knife<br/>
Shut in upon itself and do no harm<br/>
In this close hand of Love, now soft and warm,<br/>
And let us hear no sound of human strife<br/>
After the click of the shutting.  Life to life—<br/>
I lean upon thee, Dear, without alarm,<br/>
And feel as safe as guarded by a charm<br/>
Against the stab of worldlings, who if rife<br/>
Are weak to injure.  Very whitely still<br/>
The lilies of our lives may reassure<br/>
Their blossoms from their roots, accessible<br/>
Alone to heavenly dews that drop not fewer;<br/>
Growing straight, out of man’s reach, on the hill.<br/>
God only, who made us rich, can make us poor.</p>
<h2>XXV</h2>
<p class="poetry">A heavy heart, Belovëd, have I borne<br/>
From year to year until I saw thy face,<br/>
And sorrow after sorrow took the place<br/>
Of all those natural joys as lightly worn<br/>
As the stringed pearls, each lifted in its turn<br/>
By a beating heart at dance-time.  Hopes apace<br/>
Were changed to long despairs, till God’s own grace<br/>
Could scarcely lift above the world forlorn<br/>
My heavy heart.  Then thou didst bid me bring<br/>
And let it drop adown thy calmly great<br/>
Deep being!  Fast it sinketh, as a thing<br/>
Which its own nature does precipitate,<br/>
While thine doth close above it, mediating<br/>
Betwixt the stars and the unaccomplished fate.</p>
<h2>XXVI</h2>
<p class="poetry">I lived with visions for my company<br/>
Instead of men and women, years ago,<br/>
And found them gentle mates, nor thought to know<br/>
A sweeter music than they played to me.<br/>
But soon their trailing purple was not free<br/>
Of this world’s dust, their lutes did silent grow,<br/>
And I myself grew faint and blind below<br/>
Their vanishing eyes.  Then thou didst come—to be,<br/>
Belovëd, what they seemed.  Their shining fronts,<br/>
Their songs, their splendours, (better, yet the same,<br/>
As river-water hallowed into fonts)<br/>
Met in thee, and from out thee overcame<br/>
My soul with satisfaction of all wants:<br/>
Because God’s gifts put man’s best dreams to
shame.</p>
<h2>XXVII</h2>
<p class="poetry">My own Belovëd, who hast lifted me<br/>
From this drear flat of earth where I was thrown,<br/>
And, in betwixt the languid ringlets, blown<br/>
A life-breath, till the forehead hopefully<br/>
Shines out again, as all the angels see,<br/>
Before thy saving kiss!  My own, my own,<br/>
Who camest to me when the world was gone,<br/>
And I who looked for only God, found thee!<br/>
I find thee; I am safe, and strong, and glad.<br/>
As one who stands in dewless asphodel,<br/>
Looks backward on the tedious time he had<br/>
In the upper life,—so I, with bosom-swell,<br/>
Make witness, here, between the good and bad,<br/>
That Love, as strong as Death, retrieves as well.</p>
<h2>XXVIII</h2>
<p class="poetry">My letters! all dead paper, mute and white!<br/>
And yet they seem alive and quivering<br/>
Against my tremulous hands which loose the string<br/>
And let them drop down on my knee to-night.<br/>
This said,—he wished to have me in his sight<br/>
Once, as a friend: this fixed a day in spring<br/>
To come and touch my hand . . . a simple thing,<br/>
Yet I wept for it!—this, . . . the paper’s light . .
.<br/>
Said, Dear I love thee; and I sank and quailed<br/>
As if God’s future thundered on my past.<br/>
This said, I am thine—and so its ink has paled<br/>
With lying at my heart that beat too fast.<br/>
And this . . . O Love, thy words have ill availed<br/>
If, what this said, I dared repeat at last!</p>
<h2>XXIX</h2>
<p class="poetry">I think of thee!—my thoughts do twine and
bud<br/>
About thee, as wild vines, about a tree,<br/>
Put out broad leaves, and soon there’s nought to see<br/>
Except the straggling green which hides the wood.<br/>
Yet, O my palm-tree, be it understood<br/>
I will not have my thoughts instead of thee<br/>
Who art dearer, better!  Rather, instantly<br/>
Renew thy presence; as a strong tree should,<br/>
Rustle thy boughs and set thy trunk all bare,<br/>
And let these bands of greenery which insphere thee,<br/>
Drop heavily down,—burst, shattered everywhere!<br/>
Because, in this deep joy to see and hear thee<br/>
And breathe within thy shadow a new air,<br/>
I do not think of thee—I am too near thee.</p>
<h2>XXX</h2>
<p class="poetry">I see thine image through my tears to-night,<br/>
And yet to-day I saw thee smiling.  How<br/>
Refer the cause?—Belovëd, is it thou<br/>
Or I, who makes me sad?  The acolyte<br/>
Amid the chanted joy and thankful rite<br/>
May so fall flat, with pale insensate brow,<br/>
On the altar-stair.  I hear thy voice and vow,<br/>
Perplexed, uncertain, since thou art out of sight,<br/>
As he, in his swooning ears, the choir’s amen.<br/>
Belovëd, dost thou love? or did I see all<br/>
The glory as I dreamed, and fainted when<br/>
Too vehement light dilated my ideal,<br/>
For my soul’s eyes?  Will that light come again,<br/>
As now these tears come—falling hot and real?</p>
<h2>XXXI</h2>
<p class="poetry">Thou comest! all is said without a word.<br/>
I sit beneath thy looks, as children do<br/>
In the noon-sun, with souls that tremble through<br/>
Their happy eyelids from an unaverred<br/>
Yet prodigal inward joy.  Behold, I erred<br/>
In that last doubt! and yet I cannot rue<br/>
The sin most, but the occasion—that we two<br/>
Should for a moment stand unministered<br/>
By a mutual presence.  Ah, keep near and close,<br/>
Thou dove-like help! and when my fears would rise,<br/>
With thy broad heart serenely interpose:<br/>
Brood down with thy divine sufficiencies<br/>
These thoughts which tremble when bereft of those,<br/>
Like callow birds left desert to the skies.</p>
<h2>XXXII</h2>
<p class="poetry">The first time that the sun rose on thine
oath<br/>
To love me, I looked forward to the moon<br/>
To slacken all those bonds which seemed too soon<br/>
And quickly tied to make a lasting troth.<br/>
Quick-loving hearts, I thought, may quickly loathe;<br/>
And, looking on myself, I seemed not one<br/>
For such man’s love!—more like an out-of-tune<br/>
Worn viol, a good singer would be wroth<br/>
To spoil his song with, and which, snatched in haste,<br/>
Is laid down at the first ill-sounding note.<br/>
I did not wrong myself so, but I placed<br/>
A wrong on thee.  For perfect strains may float<br/>
’Neath master-hands, from instruments defaced,—<br/>
And great souls, at one stroke, may do and doat.</p>
<h2>XXXIII</h2>
<p class="poetry">Yes, call me by my pet-name! let me hear<br/>
The name I used to run at, when a child,<br/>
From innocent play, and leave the cowslips plied,<br/>
To glance up in some face that proved me dear<br/>
With the look of its eyes.  I miss the clear<br/>
Fond voices which, being drawn and reconciled<br/>
Into the music of Heaven’s undefiled,<br/>
Call me no longer.  Silence on the bier,<br/>
While I call God—call God!—so let thy mouth<br/>
Be heir to those who are now exanimate.<br/>
Gather the north flowers to complete the south,<br/>
And catch the early love up in the late.<br/>
Yes, call me by that name,—and I, in truth,<br/>
With the same heart, will answer and not wait.</p>
<h2>XXXIV</h2>
<p class="poetry">With the same heart, I said, I’ll answer
thee<br/>
As those, when thou shalt call me by my name—<br/>
Lo, the vain promise! is the same, the same,<br/>
Perplexed and ruffled by life’s strategy?<br/>
When called before, I told how hastily<br/>
I dropped my flowers or brake off from a game.<br/>
To run and answer with the smile that came<br/>
At play last moment, and went on with me<br/>
Through my obedience.  When I answer now,<br/>
I drop a grave thought, break from solitude;<br/>
Yet still my heart goes to thee—ponder how—<br/>
Not as to a single good, but all my good!<br/>
Lay thy hand on it, best one, and allow<br/>
That no child’s foot could run fast as this blood.</p>
<h2>XXXV</h2>
<p class="poetry">If I leave all for thee, wilt thou exchange<br/>
And be all to me?  Shall I never miss<br/>
Home-talk and blessing and the common kiss<br/>
That comes to each in turn, nor count it strange,<br/>
When I look up, to drop on a new range<br/>
Of walls and floors, another home than this?<br/>
Nay, wilt thou fill that place by me which is<br/>
Filled by dead eyes too tender to know change<br/>
That’s hardest.  If to conquer love, has tried,<br/>
To conquer grief, tries more, as all things prove,<br/>
For grief indeed is love and grief beside.<br/>
Alas, I have grieved so I am hard to love.<br/>
Yet love me—wilt thou?  Open thy heart wide,<br/>
And fold within, the wet wings of thy dove.</p>
<h2>XXXVI</h2>
<p class="poetry">When we met first and loved, I did not build<br/>
Upon the event with marble.  Could it mean<br/>
To last, a love set pendulous between<br/>
Sorrow and sorrow?  Nay, I rather thrilled,<br/>
Distrusting every light that seemed to gild<br/>
The onward path, and feared to overlean<br/>
A finger even.  And, though I have grown serene<br/>
And strong since then, I think that God has willed<br/>
A still renewable fear . . . O love, O troth . . .<br/>
Lest these enclaspëd hands should never hold,<br/>
This mutual kiss drop down between us both<br/>
As an unowned thing, once the lips being cold.<br/>
And Love, be false! if he, to keep one oath,<br/>
Must lose one joy, by his life’s star foretold.</p>
<h2>XXXVII</h2>
<p class="poetry">Pardon, oh, pardon, that my soul should make<br/>
Of all that strong divineness which I know<br/>
For thine and thee, an image only so<br/>
Formed of the sand, and fit to shift and break.<br/>
It is that distant years which did not take<br/>
Thy sovranty, recoiling with a blow,<br/>
Have forced my swimming brain to undergo<br/>
Their doubt and dread, and blindly to forsake<br/>
Thy purity of likeness and distort<br/>
Thy worthiest love to a worthless counterfeit.<br/>
As if a shipwrecked Pagan, safe in port,<br/>
His guardian sea-god to commemorate,<br/>
Should set a sculptured porpoise, gills a-snort<br/>
And vibrant tail, within the temple-gate.</p>
<h2>XXXVIII</h2>
<p class="poetry">First time he kissed me, he but only kissed<br/>
The fingers of this hand wherewith I write;<br/>
And ever since, it grew more clean and white.<br/>
Slow to world-greetings, quick with its “O, list,”<br/>
When the angels speak.  A ring of amethyst<br/>
I could not wear here, plainer to my sight,<br/>
Than that first kiss.  The second passed in height<br/>
The first, and sought the forehead, and half missed,<br/>
Half falling on the hair.  O beyond meed!<br/>
That was the chrism of love, which love’s own crown,<br/>
With sanctifying sweetness, did precede<br/>
The third upon my lips was folded down<br/>
In perfect, purple state; since when, indeed,<br/>
I have been proud and said, “My love, my own.”</p>
<h2>XXXIX</h2>
<p class="poetry">Because thou hast the power and own’st
the grace<br/>
To look through and behind this mask of me,<br/>
(Against which, years have beat thus blanchingly,<br/>
With their rains,) and behold my soul’s true face,<br/>
The dim and weary witness of life’s race,—<br/>
Because thou hast the faith and love to see,<br/>
Through that same soul’s distracting lethargy,<br/>
The patient angel waiting for a place<br/>
In the new Heavens,—because nor sin nor woe,<br/>
Nor God’s infliction, nor death’s neighbourhood,<br/>
Nor all which others viewing, turn to go,<br/>
Nor all which makes me tired of all, self-viewed,—<br/>
Nothing repels thee, . . . Dearest, teach me so<br/>
To pour out gratitude, as thou dost, good!</p>
<h2>XL</h2>
<p class="poetry">Oh, yes! they love through all this world of
ours!<br/>
I will not gainsay love, called love forsooth:<br/>
I have heard love talked in my early youth,<br/>
And since, not so long back but that the flowers<br/>
Then gathered, smell still.  Mussulmans and Giaours<br/>
Throw kerchiefs at a smile, and have no ruth<br/>
For any weeping.  Polypheme’s white tooth<br/>
Slips on the nut if, after frequent showers,<br/>
The shell is over-smooth,—and not so much<br/>
Will turn the thing called love, aside to hate<br/>
Or else to oblivion.  But thou art not such<br/>
A lover, my Belovëd! thou canst wait<br/>
Through sorrow and sickness, to bring souls to touch,<br/>
And think it soon when others cry “Too late.”</p>
<h2>XLI</h2>
<p class="poetry">I thank all who have loved me in their
hearts,<br/>
With thanks and love from mine.  Deep thanks to all<br/>
Who paused a little near the prison-wall<br/>
To hear my music in its louder parts<br/>
Ere they went onward, each one to the mart’s<br/>
Or temple’s occupation, beyond call.<br/>
But thou, who, in my voice’s sink and fall<br/>
When the sob took it, thy divinest Art’s<br/>
Own instrument didst drop down at thy foot<br/>
To harken what I said between my tears, . . .<br/>
Instruct me how to thank thee!  Oh, to shoot<br/>
My soul’s full meaning into future years,<br/>
That they should lend it utterance, and salute<br/>
Love that endures, from life that disappears!</p>
<h2>XLII</h2>
<p class="poetry">My future will not copy fair my past—<br/>
I wrote that once; and thinking at my side<br/>
My ministering life-angel justified<br/>
The word by his appealing look upcast<br/>
To the white throne of God, I turned at last,<br/>
And there, instead, saw thee, not unallied<br/>
To angels in thy soul!  Then I, long tried<br/>
By natural ills, received the comfort fast,<br/>
While budding, at thy sight, my pilgrim’s staff<br/>
Gave out green leaves with morning dews impearled.<br/>
I seek no copy now of life’s first half:<br/>
Leave here the pages with long musing curled,<br/>
And write me new my future’s epigraph,<br/>
New angel mine, unhoped for in the world!</p>
<h2>XLIII</h2>
<p class="poetry">How do I love thee?  Let me count the
ways.<br/>
I love thee to the depth and breadth and height<br/>
My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight<br/>
For the ends of Being and ideal Grace.<br/>
I love thee to the level of everyday’s<br/>
Most quiet need, by sun and candlelight.<br/>
I love thee freely, as men strive for Right;<br/>
I love thee purely, as they turn from Praise.<br/>
I love thee with the passion put to use<br/>
In my old griefs, and with my childhood’s faith.<br/>
I love thee with a love I seemed to lose<br/>
With my lost saints,—I love thee with the breath,<br/>
Smiles, tears, of all my life!—and, if God choose,<br/>
I shall but love thee better after death.</p>
<h2>XLIV</h2>
<p class="poetry">Belovëd, thou hast brought me many
flowers<br/>
Plucked in the garden, all the summer through,<br/>
And winter, and it seemed as if they grew<br/>
In this close room, nor missed the sun and showers.<br/>
So, in the like name of that love of ours,<br/>
Take back these thoughts which here unfolded too,<br/>
And which on warm and cold days I withdrew<br/>
From my heart’s ground.  Indeed, those beds and
bowers<br/>
Be overgrown with bitter weeds and rue,<br/>
And wait thy weeding; yet here’s eglantine,<br/>
Here’s ivy!—take them, as I used to do<br/>
Thy flowers, and keep them where they shall not pine.<br/>
Instruct thine eyes to keep their colours true,<br/>
And tell thy soul, their roots are left in mine.</p>

