<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Sonnets from the Portuguese</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="chapter-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">I</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>I thought once how Theocritus had sung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sweet years, the dear and wished-for years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who each one in a gracious hand appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear a gift for mortals, old or young:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as I mused it in his antique tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw, in gradual vision through my tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweet, sad years, the melancholy years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those of my own life, who by turns had flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shadow across me. Straightway I was ’ware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So weeping, how a mystic Shape did move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind me, and drew me backward by the hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a voice said in mastery, while I strove⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Guess now who holds thee!”⁠—“Death,” I said, But, there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver answer rang, “Not Death, but Love.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">II</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>But only three in all God’s universe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have heard this word thou hast said⁠—Himself, beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee speaking, and me listening! and replied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of us ⁠— <em>that</em> was God! — and laid the curse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So darkly on my eyelids, as to amerce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sight from seeing thee⁠—that if I had died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deathweights, placed there, would have signified</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Less absolute exclusion. “Nay” is worse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From God than from all others, O my friend!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men could not part us with their worldly jars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the seas change us, nor the tempests bend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hands would touch for all the mountain-bars,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, heaven being rolled between us at the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We should but vow the faster for the stars.</p>
		</article>
    <article id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">III</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Unlike are we, unlike, O princely Heart!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unlike our uses and our destinies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our ministering two angels look surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one another, as they strike athwart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their wings in passing. Thou, bethink thee, art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A guest for queens to social pageantries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gazes from a hundred brighter eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than tears even can make mine, to play thy part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of chief musician. What hast <em>thou</em> to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With looking from the lattice-lights at me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poor, tired, wandering singer, singing through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dark, and leaning up a cypress tree?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chrism is on thine head⁠—on mine, the dew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Death must dig the level where these agree.</p>
		</article>
    <article id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">IV</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Thou hast thy calling to some palace-floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most gracious singer of high poems! where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dancers will break footing, from the care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of watching up thy pregnant lips for more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dost thou lift this house’s latch too poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hand of thine? and canst thou think and bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let thy music drop here unaware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In folds of golden fulness at my door?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look up and see the casement broken in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bats and owlets builders in the roof!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My cricket chirps against thy mandolin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hush, call no echo up in further proof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of desolation! there’s a voice within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That weeps⁠ — as thou must sing⁠ — alone, aloof.</p>
		</article>
    <article id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">V</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>I lift my heavy heart up solemnly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As once Electra her sepulchral urn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, looking in thine eyes, I overturn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ashes at thy feet. Behold and see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What a great heap of grief lay hid in me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how the red wild sparkles dimly burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the ashen greyness. If thy foot in scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could tread them out to darkness utterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It might be well perhaps. But if instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wait beside me for the wind to blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grey dust up, … those laurels on thine head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O my Beloved, will not shield thee so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That none of all the fires shall scorch and shred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hair beneath. Stand further off then! Go.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">VI</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Go from me. Yet I feel that I shall stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforth in thy shadow. Nevermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone upon the threshold of my door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of individual life, I shall command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The uses of my soul, nor lift my hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serenely in the sunshine as before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the sense of that which I forbore⁠</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy touch upon the palm. The widest land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doom takes to part us, leaves thy heart in mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pulses that beat double. What I do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what I dream include thee, as the wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must taste of its own grapes. And when I sue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God for myself, He hears that name of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sees within my eyes the tears of two.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">VII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>The face of all the world is changed, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since first I heard the footsteps of thy soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Move still, oh, still, beside me, as they stole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt me and the dreadful outer brink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of obvious death, where I, who thought to sink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was caught up into love, and taught the whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life in a new rhythm. The cup of dole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God gave for baptism, I am fain to drink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And praise its sweetness, Sweet, with thee anear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The names of country, heaven, are changed away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For where thou art or shalt be, there or here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this ⁠— this lute and song ⁠— loved yesterday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(The singing angels know) are only dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because thy name moves right in what they say.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">VIII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>What can I give thee back, O liberal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And princely giver, who hast brought the gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And purple of thine heart, unstained, untold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid them on the outside of the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For such as I to take or leave withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In unexpected largesse? am I cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ungrateful, that for these most manifold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High gifts, I render nothing back at all?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not so; not cold⁠—but very poor instead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask God who knows. For frequent tears have run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The colours from my life, and left so dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pale a stuff, it were not fitly done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give the same as pillow to thy head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go farther! let it serve to trample on.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">IX</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Can it be right to give what I can give?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let thee sit beneath the fall of tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As salt as mine, and hear the sighing years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Re-sighing on my lips renunciative</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through those infrequent smiles which fail to live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all thy adjurations? O my fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That this can scarce be right! We are not peers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So to be lovers; and I own, and grieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That givers of such gifts as mine are, must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be counted with the ungenerous. Out, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not soil thy purple with my dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor breathe my poison on thy Venice-glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor give thee any love⁠—which were unjust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beloved, I only love thee! let it pass.</p>
		</article>
    <article id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">X</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Yet, love, mere love, is beautiful indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And worthy of acceptation. Fire is bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let temple burn, or flax; an equal light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaps in the flame from cedar-plank or weed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love is fire. And when I say at need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I <em>love thee</em> ⁠— mark!⁠ — <em>I love thee</em>⁠—in thy sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I stand transfigured, glorified aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With conscience of the new rays that proceed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of my face toward thine. There’s nothing low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In love, when love the lowest: meanest creatures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who love God, God accepts while loving so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what I <em>feel</em>, across the inferior features</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what I <em>am</em>, doth flash itself, and show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How that great work of Love enhances Nature’s.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XI</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>And therefore if to love can be desert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am not all unworthy. Cheeks as pale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As these you see, and trembling knees that fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear the burden of a heavy heart⁠,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This weary minstrel-life that once was girt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To climb Aornus, and can scarce avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pipe now ’gainst the valley nightingale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A melancholy music⁠,⁠—why advert</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these things? O Beloved, it is plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am not of thy worth nor for thy place!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet, because I love thee, I obtain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that same love this vindicating grace⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To live on still in love, and yet in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bless thee, yet renounce thee to thy face.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Indeed this very love which is my boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which, when rising up from breast to brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth crown me with a ruby large enow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To draw men’s eyes and prove the inner cost⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This love even, all my worth, to the uttermost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should not love withal, unless that thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadst set me an example, shown me how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first thine earnest eyes with mine were crossed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love called love. And thus, I cannot speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of love even, as a good thing of my own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy soul hath snatched up mine all faint and weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placed it by thee on a golden throne⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that I love (O soul, we must be meek!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is by thee only, whom I love alone.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XIII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>And wilt thou have me fashion into speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The love I bear thee, finding words enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hold the torch out, while the winds are rough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between our faces, to cast light on each?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I drop it at thy feet. I cannot teach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hand to hold my spirits so far off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From myself⁠—me⁠—that I should bring thee proof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In words, of love hid in me out of reach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, let the silence of my womanhood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commend my woman-love to thy belief,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing that I stand unwon, however wooed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rend the garment of my life, in brief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a most dauntless, voiceless fortitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest one touch of this heart convey its grief.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XIV</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>If thou must love me, let it be for nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except for love’s sake only. Do not say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I love her for her smile⁠—her look⁠—her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of speaking gently⁠—for a trick of thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That falls in well with mine, and certes brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sense of pleasant ease on such a day“—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For these things in themselves, Beloved, may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be changed, or change for thee⁠—and love, so wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be unwrought so. Neither love me for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine own dear pity’s wiping my cheeks dry⁠:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A creature might forget to weep, who bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy comfort long, and lose thy love thereby!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But love me for love’s sake, that evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou may’st love on, through love’s eternity.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XV</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Accuse me not, beseech thee, that I wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too calm and sad a face in front of thine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we two look two ways, and cannot shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the same sunlight on our brow and hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On me thou lookest with no doubting care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on a bee shut in a crystalline;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since sorrow hath shut me safe in love’s divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to spread wing and fly in the outer air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were most impossible failure, if I strove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fail so. But I look on thee⁠—on thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beholding, besides love, the end of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing oblivion beyond memory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one who sits and gazes from above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the rivers to the bitter sea.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XVI</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>And yet, because thou overcomest so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because thou art more noble and like a king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou canst prevail against my fears and fling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy purple round me, till my heart shall grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too close against thine heart henceforth to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How it shook when alone. Why, conquering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May prove as lordly and complete a thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In lifting upward, as in crushing low!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as a vanquished soldier yields his sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one who lifts him from the bloody earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so, Beloved, I at last record,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here ends my strife. If <em>thou</em> invite me forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I rise above abasement at the word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make thy love larger to enlarge my worth!</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XVII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>My poet, thou canst touch on all the notes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God set between His After and Before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strike up and strike off the general roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the rushing worlds a melody that floats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a serene air purely. Antidotes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of medicated music, answering for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mankind’s forlornest uses, thou canst pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thence into their ears. God’s will devotes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine to such ends, and mine to wait on thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How, Dearest, wilt thou have me for most use?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hope, to sing by gladly? or a fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad memory, with thy songs to interfuse?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shade, in which to sing⁠—of palm or pine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A grave, on which to rest from singing? Choose.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XVIII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>I never gave a lock of hair away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a man, Dearest, except this to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which now upon my fingers thoughtfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ring out to the full brown length and say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Take it.” My day of youth went yesterday;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hair no longer bounds to my foot’s glee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor plant I it from rose- or myrtle-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As girls do, any more: it only may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now shade on two pale cheeks the mark of tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught drooping from the head that hangs aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through sorrow’s trick. I thought the funeral shears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would take this first, but Love is justified⁠:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take it thou,⁠—finding pure, from all those years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kiss my mother left here when she died.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XIX</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>The soul’s Rialto hath its merchandize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I barter curl for curl upon that mart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from my poet’s forehead to my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receive this lock which outweighs argosies⁠,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As purply black, as erst to Pindar’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dim purpureal tresses gloomed athwart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nine white Muse-brows. For this counterpart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bay-crown’s shade, Beloved, I surmise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still lingers on thy curl, it is so black!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus, with a fillet of smooth-kissing breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I tie the shadows safe from gliding back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay the gift where nothing hindereth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here on my heart, as on thy brow, to lack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No natural heat till mine grows cold in death.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XX</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Beloved, my Beloved, when I think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou wast in the world a year ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time I sat alone here in the snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw no footprint, heard the silence sink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No moment at thy voice, but, link by link</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went counting all my chains as if that so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never could fall off at any blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck by thy possible hand⁠,⁠—why, thus I drink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life’s great cup of wonder! Wonderful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never to feel thee thrill the day or night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With personal act or speech⁠—nor ever cull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some prescience of thee with the blossoms white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou sawest growing! Atheists are as dull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who cannot guess God’s presence out of sight.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXI</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Say over again, and yet once over again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou dost love me. Though the word repeated</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should seem a “cuckoo-song,” as thou dost treat it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember, never to the hill or plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valley and wood, without her cuckoo-strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes the fresh Spring in all her green completed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beloved, I, amid the darkness greeted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a doubtful spirit-voice, in that doubt’s pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cry, “Speak once more⁠—thou lovest!” Who can fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too many stars, though each in heaven shall roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too many flowers, though each shall crown the year?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say thou dost love me, love me, love me⁠—toll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver iterance!⁠—only minding, Dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love me also in silence with thy soul.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>When our two souls stand up erect and strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Face to face, silent, drawing nigh and nigher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the lengthening wings break into fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At either curved point,⁠—what bitter wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can the earth do to us, that we should not long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be here contented? Think. In mounting higher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The angels would press on us, and aspire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drop some golden orb of perfect song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into our deep, dear silence. Let us stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather on earth, Beloved⁠—where the unfit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contrarious moods of men recoil away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And isolate pure spirits, and permit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A place to stand and love in for a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With darkness and the death-hour rounding it.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXIII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Is it indeed so? If I lay here dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou miss any life in losing mine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would the sun for thee more coldly shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because of grave-damps falling round my head?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I marvelled, my Beloved, when I read</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy thought so in the letter. I am thine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ⁠— <em>so</em> much to thee? Can I pour thy wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While my hands tremble? Then my soul, instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dreams of death, resumes life’s lower range.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, love me, Love! look on me⁠—breathe on me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As brighter ladies do not count it strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For love, to give up acres and degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I yield the grave for thy sake, and exchange</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My near sweet view of Heaven, for earth with thee!</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXIV</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Let the world’s sharpness like a clasping knife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut in upon itself and do no harm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this close hand of Love, now soft and warm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let us hear no sound of human strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the click of the shutting. Life to life⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lean upon thee, Dear, without alarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feel as safe as guarded by a charm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the stab of worldlings, who if rife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are weak to injure. Very whitely still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lilies of our lives may reassure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their blossoms from their roots, accessible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone to heavenly dews that drop not fewer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Growing straight, out of man’s reach, on the hill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God only, who made us rich, can make us poor.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXV</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>A heavy heart, Beloved, have I borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From year to year until I saw thy face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sorrow after sorrow took the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all those natural joys as lightly worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the stringed pearls, each lifted in its turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a beating heart at dance-time. Hopes apace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were changed to long despairs, till God’s own grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could scarcely lift above the world forlorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heavy heart. Then <em>thou</em> didst bid me bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let it drop adown thy calmly great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep being! Fast it sinketh, as a thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which its own nature does precipitate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thine doth close above it, mediating</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt the stars and the unaccomplished fate.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXVI</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>I lived with visions for my company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of men and women, years ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And found them gentle mates, nor thought to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sweeter music than they played to me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soon their trailing purple was not free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this world’s dust, their lutes did silent grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I myself grew faint and blind below</span>
				<br/><!-- should `thou` be styled as `THOU`?? -->
				<span>Their vanishing eyes. Then thou didst come⁠—to <em>be</em>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beloved, what they <em>seemed</em>. Their shining fronts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their songs, their splendours⁠ — better, yet the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As river-water hallowed into fonts⁠ —</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met in thee, and from out thee overcame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul with satisfaction of all wants⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because God’s gifts put man’s best dreams to shame.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXVII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>My own Beloved, who hast lifted me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this drear flat of earth where I was thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in betwixt the languid ringlets, blown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A life-breath, till the forehead hopefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shines out again, as all the angels see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before thy saving kiss! My own, my own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who camest to me when the world was gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I who looked for only God, found <em>thee</em>!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I find thee: I am safe, and strong, and glad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one who stands in dewless asphodel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks backward on the tedious time he had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the upper life, ⁠—so I, with bosom-swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make witness, here, between the good and bad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Love, as strong as Death, retrieves as well.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXVIII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>My letters! all dead paper, mute and white!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet they seem alive and quivering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against my tremulous hands which loose the string</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let them drop down on my knee to-night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This said⁠—he wished to have me in his sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once, as a friend: this fixed a day in spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To come and touch my hand ⁠— a simple thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet I wept for it!⁠—this, ⁠— the paper’s light ⁠— </span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said, <em>Dear, I love thee</em>; and I sank and quailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if God’s future thundered on my past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This said, <em>I am thine</em>⁠—and so its ink has paled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lying at my heart that beat too fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this ⁠— O Love, thy words have ill availed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If what this said I dared repeat at last!</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXIX</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>I think of thee!⁠—my thoughts do twine and bud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About thee, as wild vines, about a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put out broad leaves, and soon there’s nought to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except the straggling green which hides the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, O my palm-tree, be it understood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not have my thoughts instead of thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who art dearer, better! Rather, instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renew thy presence; as a strong tree should,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rustle thy boughs and set thy trunk all bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let these bands of greenery which insphere thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drop heavily down,⁠—burst, shattered, everywhere!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because, in this deep joy to see and hear thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breathe within thy shadow a new air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do not think of thee⁠—I am too near thee.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXX</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>I see thine image through my tears tonight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet today I saw thee smiling. How</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refer the cause?⁠—Beloved, is it thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or I who makes me sad? The acolyte</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the chanted joy and thankful rite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May so fall flat, with pale insensate brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the altar-stair. I hear thy voice and vow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perplexed, uncertain, since thou art out of sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he, in his swooning ears, the choir’s amen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beloved, dost thou love? or did I see all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory as I dreamed, and fainted when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too vehement light dilated my ideal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my soul’s eyes? Will that light come again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As now these tears come⁠—falling hot and real?</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXXI</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Thou comest! all is said without a word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sit beneath thy looks, as children do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the noon-sun, with souls that tremble through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their happy eyelids from an unaverred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet prodigal inward joy. Behold, I erred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that last doubt! and yet I cannot rue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sin most, but the occasion⁠—that we two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should for a moment stand unministered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a mutual presence. Ah, keep near and close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou dove-like help! and when my fears would rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy broad heart serenely interpose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brood down with thy divine sufficiencies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These thoughts which tremble when bereft of those,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like callow birds left desert to the skies.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXXII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>The first time that the sun rose on thine oath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love me, I looked forward to the moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slacken all those bonds which seemed too soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly tied to make a lasting troth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick-loving hearts, I thought, may quickly loathe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, looking on myself, I seemed not one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For such man’s love!⁠—more like an out-of-tune</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worn viol, a good singer would be wroth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spoil his song with, and which, snatched in haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is laid down at the first ill-sounding note.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did not wrong myself so, but I placed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wrong on <em>thee</em>. For perfect strains may float</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath master-hands, from instruments defaced⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great souls, at one stroke, may do and doat.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-33" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXXIII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Yes, call me by my pet-name! let me hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The name I used to run at, when a child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From innocent play, and leave the cowslips plied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To glance up in some face that proved me dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the look of its eyes. I miss the clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fond voices which, being drawn and reconciled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the music of Heaven’s undefiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call me no longer. Silence on the bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I call God⁠—call God!⁠—so let thy mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be heir to those who are now exanimate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather the north flowers to complete the south,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And catch the early love up in the late!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, call me by that name,⁠—and I, in truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the same heart, will answer and not wait.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXXIV</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>With the same heart, I said, I’ll answer thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As those, when thou shalt call me by my name⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, the vain promise! Is the same, the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perplexed and ruffled by life’s strategy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When called before, I told how hastily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dropped my flowers or brake off from a game.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To run and answer with the smile that came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At play last moment, and went on with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through my obedience. When I answer now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I drop a grave thought,⁠— break from solitude;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet still my heart goes to thee⁠—ponder how⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not as to a single good, but all my good!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay thy hand on it, best one, and allow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That no child’s foot could run fast as this blood.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXXV</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>If I leave all for thee, wilt thou exchange</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be all to me? Shall I never miss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home-talk and blessing and the common kiss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That comes to each in turn, nor count it strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I look up, to drop on a new range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of walls and floors, another home than this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, wilt thou fill that place by me which is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled by dead eyes too tender to know change?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s hardest! If to conquer love has tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To conquer grief tries more, as all things prove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For grief indeed is love and grief beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas, I have grieved so I am hard to love⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet love me⁠—wilt thou? Open thy heart wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fold within, the wet wings of thy dove.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXXVI</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>When we met first and loved, I did not build</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the event with marble. Could it mean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To last, a love set pendulous between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrow and sorrow? Nay, I rather thrilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distrusting every light that seemed to gild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The onward path, and feared to overlean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A finger even. And, though I have grown serene</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And strong since then, I think that God has willed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A still renewable fear ⁠— O love, O troth ⁠— </span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest these enclasped hands should never hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This mutual kiss drop down between us both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As an unowned thing, once the lips being cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Love, be false! if <em>he</em>, to keep one oath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must lose one joy, by his life’s star foretold.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXXVII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Pardon, oh, pardon, that my soul should make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all that strong divineness which I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thine and thee, an image only so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Formed of the sand, and fit to shift and break.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is that distant years which did not take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sovranty, recoiling with a blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have forced my swimming brain to undergo</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their doubt and dread, and blindly to forsake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy purity of likeness and distort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy worthiest love to a worthless counterfeit:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if a shipwrecked Pagan, safe in port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His guardian sea-god to commemorate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should set a sculptured porpoise, gills a-snort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vibrant tail, within the temple-gate.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-38" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXXVIII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>First time he kissed me, he but only kissed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fingers of this hand wherewith I write,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever since, it grew more clean and white,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slow to world greetings, quick with its “Oh, list,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the angels speak. A ring of amethyst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could not wear here, plainer to my sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than that first kiss. The second passed in height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first, and sought the forehead, and half missed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half falling on the hair. O beyond meed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was the chrism of love, which love’s own crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sanctifying sweetness, did precede</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The third upon my lips was folded down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In perfect, purple state; since when, indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have been proud and said: “My love, my own.”</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-39" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXXIX</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Because thou hast the power and own’st the grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look through and behind this mask of me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Against which, years have beat thus blanchingly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their rains), and behold my soul’s true face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dim and weary witness of life’s race⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because thou hast the faith and love to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through that same soul’s distracting lethargy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The patient angel waiting for a place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the new Heavens⁠—because nor sin nor woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor God’s infliction, nor death’s neighbourhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor all which others viewing, turn to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor all which makes me tired of all, self-viewed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing repels thee, ⁠— Dearest, teach me so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pour out gratitude, as thou dost, good!</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XL</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Oh, yes! they love through all this world of ours!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not gainsay love, called love forsooth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have heard love talked in my early youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since, not so long back but that the flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then gathered, smell still. Mussulmans and Giaours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throw kerchiefs at a smile, and have no ruth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For any weeping. Polypheme’s white tooth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slips on the nut, if after frequent showers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shell is over-smooth; and not so much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will turn the thing called love, aside to hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else to oblivion. But thou art not such</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lover, my Beloved! thou canst wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through sorrow and sickness, to bring souls to touch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think it soon when others cry “Too late.”</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-41" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XLI</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>I thank all who have loved me in their hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thanks and love from mine. Deep thanks to all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who paused a little near the prison-wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear my music in its louder parts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere they went onward, each one to the mart’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or temple’s occupation, beyond call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou, who, in my voice’s sink and fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the sob took it, thy divinest Art’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Own instrument didst drop down at thy foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To harken what I said between my tears, ⁠— </span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instruct me how to thank thee! Oh, to shoot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul’s full meaning into future years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That <em>they</em> should lend it utterance, and salute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love that endures, from Life that disappears!</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-42" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XLII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span><em>My future will not copy fair my past</em>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wrote that once; and thinking at my side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My ministering life-angel justified</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word by his appealing look upcast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the white throne of God, I turned at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there, instead, saw thee, not unallied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To angels in thy soul! Then I, long tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By natural ills, received the comfort fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While budding, at thy sight, my pilgrim’s staff</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave out green leaves with morning dews impearled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seek no copy now of life’s first half:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave here the pages with long musing curled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And write me new my future’s epigraph,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New angel mine, unhoped for in the world!</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-43" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XLIII</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love thee to the depth and breadth and height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the ends of Being and ideal Grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love thee to the level of everyday’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most quiet need, by sun and candlelight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love thee freely, as men strive for Right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love thee purely, as they turn from Praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love thee with the passion put to use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my old griefs, and with my childhood’s faith.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love thee with a love I seemed to lose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my lost saints,⁠—I love thee with the breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiles, tears, of all my life!⁠—and, if God choose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall but love thee better after death.</p>
		</article>
		<article id="chapter-44" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XLIV</h2>
			<p>
      	<span>Beloved, thou hast brought me many flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plucked in the garden, all the summer through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And winter, and it seemed as if they grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this close room, nor missed the sun and showers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, in the like name of that love of ours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take back these thoughts which here unfolded too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which on warm and cold days I withdrew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my heart’s ground. Indeed, those beds and bowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be overgrown with bitter weeds and rue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wait thy weeding; yet here’s eglantine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here’s ivy!⁠—take them, as I used to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy flowers, and keep them where they shall not pine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instruct thine eyes to keep their colours true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell thy soul their roots are left in mine.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
